- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools for everyday life.
[gentle music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a Professor of
Neurobiology and Ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate
from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roka.
Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that in my opinion are the
absolute best out there.
The sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are made by Roka
have a number of properties
that are really unique.
First of all, they're
extremely lightweight,
you never even notice
that they're on your face.
Second, the optical clarity is fantastic.
One of the things that's
really hard to accomplish,
but that Roka succeeded in accomplishing
is making sunglasses that you can wear
in lots of different environments.
As you move from bright to
shadowed regions for instance,
or as the amount of sunlight changes
many eyeglasses will make it such
that it's hard to see your environment
and you need to take the eyeglasses off,
or you can't see or detect borders.
With Roka sunglasses,
all of that is seamless,
they clearly understand
the adaptation mechanisms
and habituation mechanisms,
all these fancy details
about the human visual system
have allowed them to design a sunglass
that allows you to be in any environment
and to see that
environment extremely well.
The eyeglasses are terrific,
I wear readers at night
and again, they just make the
whole experience of reading
or working on a screen
at night very, very easy,
very easy on the eyes.
The aesthetic of the eyeglasses
and sunglasses is also suburb.
You know, I chuckle sometimes
when I see sports frames
or sports glasses,
a lot of them just look
ridiculous frankly,
but the Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
have a terrific aesthetic,
they have a huge variety to select from.
If you'd like to try Roka glasses,
you can go to Roka,
that's roka.com and
enter the code Huberman
and you'll get 20% off your first order,
that's roka.com and
enter the code Huberman
to get 20% off your first order.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting
regular blood work done
for the simple reason
that many of the factors
that impact your immediate
and long-term health
can only be detected from
a quality blood test.
One of the major problems
with blood tests however
is that oftentimes you'll
get information back
about levels of metabolic
factors, hormones, et cetera,
and there won't be any directives
about what to do with that information.
With InsideTracker, it
makes all of that very easy.
First of all, they can come to your home
to do the blood test and DNA test
or you can go to a local clinic,
they make that very easy.
Second of all, when you
get the information back
about the levels of hormones,
and metabolic factors, and
other things in your blood
it gives you simple directives.
They have a dashboard
that allows you to assess
for instance, whether or not
you ought to make changes
in your nutrition, or
changes in your exercise,
or changes in your sleep regimen,
any number of different lifestyle factors
that can help bring the
markers and the various factors
in your blood and DNA to
the appropriate levels.
So, really they're putting you
in the driver's seat for your health.
In fact, one of the
listeners of this podcast
contacted me recently and said
I took an InsideTracker test,
I felt like I was in great health,
but I noticed from the test
that I had high CRP, C-reactive protein.
C-reactive protein is a
marker that if it's too high
is a cautionary note
about various cardiac
and even eye diseases,
so it's something that they
are now taking actions on
as a consequence of getting
their blood work done
and taking the InsideTracker test.
So, I think that's just
one of many examples
that we hear about.
I have examples from my own life
for instance of different
factors in my blood being off
and making adjustments to nutrition
and other aspects of my life
that have allowed me to bring
those into the proper range.
So, if you care about your health
InsideTracker may very
well be right for you.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman.
And if you do that, you'll get 25% off
any of InsideTracker's plans,
just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought
to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin,
mineral probiotic drink.
I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012
so I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast.
Athletic Greens is terrific
because it covers your nutritional bases.
If I drink Athletic Greens once
and I sometimes drink it twice a day,
then I'm sure that all
the vitamins I need,
I'm getting those.
All the minerals I
need, I'm getting those,
and the probiotics.
There's now a ton of data
showing that a healthy gut microbiome
is vital to brain function,
vital to immune function,
and vital to all aspects of our health.
So with Athletic Greens,
you get the vitamins,
the minerals, and the probiotics
to cover all your bases.
In fact, anytime people ask
me what should they take
or what could they do
to support their health,
provided that they
already have their sleep
and other aspects of their life in order,
Athletic Greens is the
thing that I recommend
because it covers all the
foundations, all the bases
of what one really wants from a supplement
without having to take a
ton of different things.
It also tastes great,
almost everybody that tries it
and then reported back to me has told me
that they really liked the taste.
I mix mine with water,
a little bit of lemon and lime juice,
and I really like the
taste, it's delicious to me.
I drink it once or twice a day.
It's keto compatible,
it's compatible with
most fasting regimens,
it's compatible with if you're a vegan
or if you're not vegan, it's compatible
with essentially every
nutritional plan out there,
so it's just a terrific
all around supplement
and benefit to one's health and diet.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman.
And if you do that, you'll
claim a special offer,
they'll give you five free travel packs
that make it easy to
mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
and they'll give you a year
supply of vitamin D3, K2.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim that special offer.
This month, we've been
talking about the senses,
how we detect things in our environment.
The last episode was all about vision,
how we take light and
convert that information
into things that we can perceive
like colors, and faces, and motion,
things of that sort
as well as how we use
light to change our biology
in ways that are subconscious
that we don't realize,
things like mood, and metabolism,
and levels of alertness.
Today, we're going to talk
about chemical sensing,
we're going to talk
about the sense of smell,
our ability to detect
odors in our environment.
We're also going to talk about taste,
our ability to detect chemicals
and make sense of chemicals
that are put in our mouth
and into our digestive tract.
And we are going to talk about chemicals
that are made by other human beings
that powerfully modulator
the way that we feel,
our hormones, and our health.
Now, that last category are
sometimes called pheromones.
However, whether or not
pheromones exist in humans
is rather controversial,
there actually hasn't been a clear example
of a true human pheromonal effect,
but what is absolutely
clear, what is undeniable
is that there are chemicals
that human beings make
and release in things
like tears onto our skin,
and sweat, and even breath
that powerfully modulate
or control the biology
of other individuals.
In fact right now, even if
you're completely alone,
your chemical environment
internally is being controlled
by external chemicals,
your nervous system, and your
hormones, and your metabolism
are being modified by
things in your environment,
so we're going to talk about those.
It's an absolutely fascinating
aspect to our biology,
it's one of our most primordial,
meaning primitive aspects of our biology,
but it's still very
active in all of us today.
This episode, believe it or not,
will have a lot of tools,
a lot of protocols.
Even though I'm guessing most of you
can probably smell your
environment just fine,
that you know what you like
to eat and what tastes good,
and what doesn't taste good to you,
today's episode is going
to talk about tools
that will allow you to actually leverage
these chemical sensing mechanisms,
including how you smell
not how you smell in
the qualitative sense,
but how you smell in the verb sense,
the action of sniffing and smelling
to enhance your sense of smell
and to enhance your
sense of taste as well,
believe it or not, to
enhance your cognition,
your ability to learn and remember things.
Everything we're going
to talk about as always
is grounded in quality
peer-reviewed studies
from some excellent laboratories,
I'll provide some resources along the way,
so that means tools and protocols
and also basic information.
You're going to learn
a ton of neuroscience
and lot of biology in general.
And I think what you'll
come to realize by the end
is that while we are clearly different
from the other animals,
there are aspects to our
biology that are very similar
to that of other animals
in very interesting ways.
Before we dive into chemical sensing,
I want to just briefly
touch on a few things
from the vision episode.
One is a summary of a protocol.
So, I covered 13 protocols last episode,
if you haven't seen that
episode, check it out.
Those protocols will
allow you to be more alert
and to see better over
time if you follow them.
All of them are zero cost,
you can find any and all
of them at hubermanlab.com,
there's a link to those videos
and tools and protocols,
everything is timestamped.
The two protocols that I just
want to remind everybody of
are the protocol of near-far
viewing that all of us
regardless of age, should
probably spend about five minutes
three times a week, doing some
near-far viewing exercises.
So, that would be bringing a pen or pencil
up close to the point where
you're about to cross your eyes,
but you don't cross your eyes
and then out at some distance.
And then look beyond that pen
or other object that you're using
off as far as you can into the distance.
It would be great if you could
do this on a balcony or deck
and then look way off in the distance
and then bring it back in.
This is going to exercise
that accommodation reflex,
the change in the shape of the lens
can help offset a number of things
including myopia, near-sightedness.
The other one is this incredible study
that showed that two hours a day outside,
even if you're doing other
things while you're outside
can help offset myopia, nearsightedness.
So, try and get outside,
it's really the sunlight
and the blue light, right?
Everyone's been demonizing
blue light out there,
but blue light is great
provided it's not super, super bright
and really close to your eyes.
Blue is terrific if it
comes from sunlight.
Two hours a day outside
is going to help offset
myopia, nearsightedness.
Now, that's a lot of time,
I think most of us are
not getting that time,
but since you can do other
things like gardening,
or reading, or walking, or running.
If you can get that two hours outside
your visual system and
your brain will benefit.
I also would like to
make one brief correction
to something that I said incorrectly
in the previous episode.
At the end of the episode,
I talked about lutein,
and how lutein may help offset
some moderate to severe
age-related macular degeneration.
As well, I talked about how some people
are supplementing with lutein
even though they don't have
age-related macular degeneration
with the idea in mind
that it might help offset some vision loss
as they get older.
I said lutein, and lutein
was the correct thing to say,
but once or twice, when
I started speaking fast
I said leucine and not lutein.
I want to emphasize that leucine,
an amino acid, very interesting,
important for muscle building
covered in previous episodes,
but lutein, L-U-T-E-I-N,
is the molecule and compound
that I was referring to
in terms of supplementing
for sake of vision.
So I apologize, please
forgive me I misspoke,
a couple of you caught that right away,
in listening to the
episode after it went up
I realized that I had misspoken.
So, lutein for vision,
leucine for muscles, and muscle growth,
and strength, et cetera.
Before we dive into the
content of today's episode,
I want to just briefly
touch on color vision.
Many of you asked questions
about color vision
and color perception.
And indeed color perception
is a fascinating aspect
of the human visual system,
it's one of the things
that makes us unique.
There are certainly
other animals out there
that can detect all the
colors of the rainbow,
some can even detect into the
infrared, into the far-red
that we can't see,
but nonetheless, human color vision,
provided that somebody isn't colorblind,
is really remarkable.
And if you're interested in color vision
or you want to answer questions
about art or about for instance
why that dress that showed
up online a few years ago
looks blue to you and
yellow to somebody else.
All the answers to that
are in this terrific book
which is "What Is Color?:
50 Questions and Answers
on the Science of Color".
I did not write this book, I wish I had,
the book is by Arielle and Joann Eckstut,
that E-C-K-S-T-U-T.
So, it's "What Is Color?:
50 Questions and Answers
on the Science of Color".
It's an absolutely fabulous book,
I've no business relationship to them.
I did help them get in contact
with some color vision scientists
when they reached out to me.
And you can know that all
the information in the book
was vetted by excellent
color vision scientists.
It's a really wonderful
and beautiful book,
the illustrations are beautiful.
If you're somebody who's
interested in design or art,
or you're just curious
about the science of color,
it's a terrific book,
I highly recommend it.
If you just look it up online,
there are a variety of places
that will allow you to access the book.
So, let's talk about sensing chemicals
and how chemicals control us.
In our environment,
there are a lot of
different physical stimuli.
There is light,
photons, which are light energy
and those land on your retinas
and your retinas tell
your brain about them,
and your brain creates
this thing we call vision.
There are sound waves,
literally particles moving through the air
and reverberations that create
what we call sound and hearing.
And of course there
are mechanical stimuli,
pressure, light touch, scratch,
tickle, et cetera, that lands on our skin
or the blowing of a breeze
that deflects the hairs on our skin,
and we can sense mechanical
touch, mechanical sensation.
And there are chemicals,
there are things floating
around in the environment
which we call volatile chemicals.
So, volatile sounds oftentimes
like emotionally volatile,
but it just means that they're
floating around out there.
So, when you actually smell something
like let's say you smell
a wonderfully smelling rose or cake.
Yes, you are inhaling the
particles into your nose,
they're literally little particles
of those chemicals are
going up into your nose
and being detected by your brain.
Also, if you smell something putrid,
disgusting, or awful,
use your imagination,
those particles are
going up into your nose
and being detected by neurons
that are part of your brain.
Other ways of getting
chemicals into our system
is by putting them in our mouth,
by literally taking
foods and chewing them,
or sucking on them and breaking them down
into their component parts,
and that's one way that we sense chemicals
with this thing, our tongue.
And there are chemicals that can enter
through other mucosal linings
and other kind of just think damp,
sticky linings of your body.
And the main ones would be the eyes,
so you've got your nose,
your eyes and your mouth.
But mainly when we have
chemicals coming into our system
it's through our nose
or through our mouth.
Although, sometimes through our skin
certain things can go
transdermal, not many,
and through our eyes.
So these chemicals,
we sometimes bring into
our body, into our biology,
through deliberate action.
We select a food, we chew that food,
and we do it intentionally.
Sometimes they're coming into our body
through non-deliberate action.
We enter an environment,
and there's smoke and we smell the smoke,
and as a consequence we take action.
Sometimes we are forced to eat something
because somebody tells us we should eat it
or we do it to be polite.
So, there are all these ways
that chemicals can make it into our body.
Sometimes however, other people
are actively making
chemicals with their body,
typically this would be with their breath,
with their tears,
or possibly, I want to
underscore possibly,
by making what are called pheromones,
molecules that they release
into the environment
typically through the breath
that enter our system through our nose,
or our eyes, or our mouth
that fundamentally change our biology.
I will explain how smell and taste
and these pheromone effects work,
but I'll just give an example,
which is a very salient
and interesting one
that was published about 10 years ago
in the Journal Science.
Science Magazine is one of the three
what we call apex journals.
There are a lot of journals out there,
but for those of you that want to know,
Science Magazine, Nature
Magazine, and Cell
are considered the three
top kind of apex journals,
they are the most stringent
in terms of getting papers accepted,
they're even reviewed there.
They have about a 95% rejection
rate at the front gate,
meaning they don't even review 95%
of what gets sent to them.
Of the things that they
do decide to review
then get sent out,
a very small percentage
of those get published,
it's very stringent.
This paper came out in Science
showing that humans, men in
particular in this study,
have a strong biological
response and hormonal response
to the tears of women.
What they did is they had women,
and in this case it was only
women for whatever reason,
cry and they collected their tears.
Then those tears were
smelled by male subjects,
or male subjects got what
was essentially the control,
which was the saline.
Men that smelled these tears
that were evoked by sadness
had a reduction in their
testosterone levels
that was significant.
They also had a reduction in brain areas
that were associated with sexual arousal.
Now, before you run off
with your interpretations
about what this means
and criticize the study
for any variety of reasons,
let's just take a step back.
I will criticize the study
for a variety of reasons too.
One is that they only used
female tiers and male subjects,
so it would have been nice for
them to also use female tears
and female subjects smelling those,
male tears and male
subjects smelling those,
male tears and female subjects
smelling those, and so on.
They didn't do that,
they did have a large number of subjects,
so that's good, that
adds power to the study.
And they did have to collect these tears
by having the women watch
what was essentially
a sad scene from a movie.
They actually recruited subjects
that had a high propensity
for crying at sad movies,
which was not all women.
It turns out that the
people that they recruited
for the study were people who said, "Yes,
I tend to cry when I see
sad things in movies."
What they're really trying to do
is get just get tears that
were authentically cried
in response to sadness,
as opposed to putting
some irritant in the eye
and collecting tears that
were evoked by something else
like just having the eyes irritated.
Nonetheless, what this study illustrates
is that there are chemicals in tears
that are evoking or changing the biology
of other individuals.
Now, most of us don't think about sniffing
or smelling other people's tears,
but you can imagine how in close couples,
or in family members,
or even close friendships, et cetera,
that we are often in close proximity
to other people's tears.
Now, I didn't select
this study as an example
because I want to focus on the effects
of tears on hormones, per se,
although I do find the
results really interesting.
I chose it because I
wanted to just emphasize
or underscore the fact
that chemicals that are
made by other individuals
are powerfully modulating
our internal state,
and that's something that
most of us don't appreciate.
I think most of us can appreciate the fact
that if we smell something
putrid, we tend to retract,
or if we smell something
delicious, we tend to lean into it.
But there are all these
ways in which chemicals
are affecting our biology,
and interpersonal
communication using chemicals
is not something that we
hear that often about,
but it's super interesting.
So, let's talk about smell
and what smell is and how it works.
I'm going to make this very basic,
but I am going to touch on
some of the core elements
of the neurobiology.
So, here's how smell works.
Smell starts with sniffing.
Now, that may come as no surprise,
but no volatile chemicals
can enter our nose
unless we inhale them.
If our nose is occluded, or
if we're actively exhaling
it's much more difficult for
smells to enter our nose,
which is why people cover their nose
when something smells bad.
Now, the way that these volatile odors
come into the nose is interesting.
The nose has a mucosal lining,
mucus that is designed to trap things,
to actually bring things
in and get stuck there.
At the base of your brain,
so you could actually imagine this
or if you wanted, you could
touch the roof of your mouth.
So, right above the roof of the mouth,
about two centimeters
is your olfactory bulb.
The olfactory bulb is
a collection of neurons
and those neurons actually
extend out of the skull,
out of your skull into your nose
into the mucosal lining.
So, what this means in
kind of a literal sense
is that you have neurons that extend
their little dendrites
and axon-like things,
they're little processes as we call them,
out into the mucus,
and they respond to
different odorant compounds.
Now, the olfactory neurons
also send a branch deeper into the brain
and they split off into
three different paths.
So, one path is for what we
call innate odor responses,
so you have some hard wired aspects
to the way that you smell the world
that were there from the day you were born
and that will be there
until the day you die.
These are the pathways and
the neurons that respond
to things like smoke,
which as you can imagine there's
a highly adaptive function
to being able to detect burning things
because burning things
generally means lack of safety
or impending threat of some kind.
It calls for action,
and indeed these neurons project
to the central area of the
brain called the amygdala,
which is often discussed in terms of fear,
but it's really fear and threat detection.
So some compounds, some
chemicals in your environment
when you smell them, unless
you're trained to overcome them
because you're a firefighter
you will naturally have a
heightened level of alertness,
you will sense threat,
and if you're in sleep,
even it will wake you up.
All right, so that's a good thing,
it's kind of an emergency system.
You also have neurons in your nose
that respond to odorants
or combinations of odorants
that evoke a sense of desire
and what we call appetitive
behaviors, approach behaviors,
that make you want to
move toward something.
So, when you smell a delicious cookie,
or some dish that's really
savory that you really like,
or a wonderful orange,
and you say, "Mmm,"
or it feels delicious,
or it smells delicious
that's because of these innate pathway,
these pathways that require
no learning whatsoever.
Now, some of the pathways from the nose,
these olfactory neurons into the brain
are involved in learned
associations with odors.
Many people have this experience
that they can remember the smell
of their grandmother's home,
or their grandmother's hands even,
or the smell of particular items baking,
or on the stove in a
particular environment.
Typically, these memories tend
to be of a kind of nurturing
sort of feeling safe and protected.
But one of the reasons why olfaction smell
is so closely tied to memory
is because olfaction is the
most ancient sense that we have,
or I should say chemical sensing
is among the most primitive
and ancient senses that we have,
probably almost certainly evolved
before vision and before hearing.
But when we come into the world
because we're still learning
about the statistics of life
about who's friendly
and who's not friendly,
and where's a fun place to be
and where's a boring place to be,
that all takes a long time to learn.
But the olfactory system seems to imprint,
seems to lay down memories very early
and create these very
powerful associations.
And if you think about it
long enough and hard enough
many of you can probably realize
that there are certain
smells that evoke a memory
of a particular place,
or person, or context.
And that's because you also
have pathways out of the nose
that are not for innate
behaviors like cringing,
or repulsion, or gagging,
or for that appetitive mmm sensation,
but that just remind you of a place,
or a thing, or a context,
could be flowers in spring,
could be grandmother's home and cookies.
This is a very common occurrence,
and it's a very common occurrence
because this generally
exists in all of us.
So, we have pathway for innate responses
and a pathway for learned responses.
And then we have this other pathway,
and in humans it's a
little bit controversial
as to whether or not
it sits truly separate
from the standard olfactory system
or whether or not it's its
own system embedded in there,
but that they call the
accessory olfactory pathway.
Accessory olfactory pathway
is what in other animals
is responsible for true pheromone effects.
We will talk about true pheromone effects,
but for example in rodents
and in some primates, including mandrills.
If you've ever seen a mandrill,
they have these like
big beak noses things,
you may have seen them at the zoo,
look them up if you
haven't seen them already,
M-A-N-D-R-I-L-S
mandrills, there are
strong pheromone effects.
Some of those include things like
if you take a pregnant
female rodent or mandrill,
you take away the father
that created those
fetuses or fetus,
and you introduce the scent of the urine
or the fur of a novel male,
she will spontaneously abort
or miscarry those fetuses,
it's a very powerful effect.
In humans, it's still controversial
whether or not anything
like that can happen,
but it's a very powerful
pheromonal effect in other animals.
Another example of a pheromone effect
is called the Vandenbergh effect
named after the person who
discovered this effect,
where you take a female
of a given species that
has not entered puberty,
you expose her to the scent or the urine
from a sexually competent,
meaning post-pubertal male,
and she spontaneously
goes into puberty earlier.
So, something about the scent
triggers something through this
accessory olfactory system,
this is a true pheromonal effect
and creates ovulation,
right and menstruation.
Or in rodents it's an estrous
cycle, not a menstrual cycle.
So, this is not to say
that the exact same things
happen in humans.
In humans, as I mentioned earlier,
there are chemical sensing
between individuals
that may be independent of the nose.
And we will talk about those,
but those are basically the three paths
by which smells, odors impact us.
So, I want to talk about
the act of smelling,
and if you are not somebody who
is very interested in smell,
but you are somebody who is interested
in making your brain work better,
learning faster, remembering more things,
this next little segment is for you
because it turns out that how you smell,
meaning the act of smelling,
not how good or bad you smell,
but the act of smelling,
sniffing, and inhalation
powerfully impacts
how your brain functions
and what you can learn
and what you can't learn.
Breathing generally
consists of two actions,
inhaling and exhaling,
and we have the option of course
to do that through our nose or our mouth.
I've talked on previous
episodes about the fact
that there are great advantages
to being a nasal breather,
and there are a great disadvantages
to being a mouth breather.
There are excellent
books and data on this,
there's the recent book
"Breath" by James Nestor,
which is an excellent book
that describes some of
the positive effects
of nasal breathing as well
as other breathing practices.
There's also the book
"Jaws" by my colleagues,
Paul Ehrlich and Sandra Kahn,
with a foreword by Jared Diamond
and an introduction by Robert
Sapolsky from Stanford.
So, that's a book chockablock
with heavy hitter authors that describes
how being a nasal breather is
beneficial for jaw structure,
for immune system function, et cetera
Breathing in through your nose,
sniffing actually has positive effects
on the way that you can acquire
and remember information.
Noam Sobel's group
originally at UC Berkeley
and then at the Weizmann Institute
has published a number of papers
that I'd like to discuss today.
One of them, Human Non-Olfactory Cognition
Phase-Locked with Inhalation,
this was published in
Nature Human Behavior,
an excellent journal.
Showed that the act of inhaling
[Andrew inhales deeply]
has a couple of interesting
and powerful consequences.
First of all, as we inhale
the brain increases in arousal,
our level of alertness
and attention increases
when we inhale as compared
to when we exhale.
Now, of course with every
inhale, there's an exhale,
you could probably
double up on your inhales
if you're doing size or something,
physiological size I've
talked about these before,
so double inhales [inhales twice]
followed by an exhale [exhales],
something like that.
Or if you're speaking, you're
going to change your cadence
and ratio of inhales and exhales,
but typically we inhale, then we exhale.
As we inhale, what this paper shows
is that the level of alertness
goes up in the brain,
and this makes sense because
as the most primitive
and primordial sense by which we interact
with our environment and bring
chemicals into our system
and detect our environment,
inhaling is a cue for
the rest of the brain
to essentially to pay
attention to what's happening,
not just to the odors
as the name of this paper suggests,
Human Non-Olfactory Cognition
Phase-Locked with Inhalation.
What that means is that
the act of inhaling itself
wakes up the brain,
it's not about what you're perceiving
or what you're smelling.
And indeed sniffing as an action,
inhaling as an action
has a powerful effect
on your ability to be alert,
your ability to attend, to focus,
and your ability to remember information.
When we exhale, the brain
goes through a subtle,
but nonetheless significant dip
in level of arousal and ability to learn.
So, what does this mean?
How should you use this knowledge?
Well, you could imagine,
and I think this will be
beneficial for most people
to focus on nasal breathing
while doing any kind of focused
work that doesn't require
that you speak, or eat,
or ingest something.
There's a separate paper published
in the journal of neuroscience that showed
that indeed if subjects, human subjects,
are restricted to breathing
through their nose,
they learn better than
if they have the option
of breathing through their mouth,
or a combination of their nose and mouth.
These are significant effects
in humans using modern
techniques from excellent groups.
So, sniffing itself is
a powerful modulator
of our cognition and our ability to learn.
You can imagine all sorts of ways
that you might apply that as a tool.
And I suggest that you play with it a bit
that if you're having a hard
time staying awake and alert,
you're having a hard time
remembering information,
you feel like you have a
kind of attention deficit,
nonclinical of course,
nasal breathing ought to help,
extending or making your inhales
more intense ought to help.
Now, this isn't really about
chemical sensing per se,
but here's where it gets
interesting and exciting.
If you are somebody
who doesn't have a very
good sense of smell,
or you're somebody who
simply wants to get better
at smelling and tasting things,
you can actually practice sniffing.
I know that sounds ridiculous,
but it turns out that
simply sniffing nothing.
So, doing something like this.
[Andrew sniffs deeply]
I guess the microphone sort
of has a smell [sniffs],
I guess my pen doesn't have a smell.
[Andrew sniffs deeply]
It turns out that doing
a series of inhales,
and of course each one
is followed by an exhale,
10 or 15 times and then smelling an object
like an orange or another item of food,
or even the skin of somebody else
will lead to an increase in your ability
to perceive those odors.
Now, there are probably
two reasons for that.
One reason is that the brain systems
of detecting things are waking up
as a mere consequence of inhaling.
Okay, so this is sort of
the olfactory equivalent
of opening your eyes wider in
order to see, more or less.
Okay, last episode I talked about
how opening your eyes wider
actually increases your
level of alertness,
it's not just that your level of alertness
causes your eyes to be open wider.
Opening your eyes wider
can actually increase
your level of alertness.
Well, it turns out that
breathing more deeply
through the nose, wakes up your brain
and it creates a heightened sensitivity
of the neurons that relate to smell.
And there's a close crossover,
I'm sure you know this,
between smell and taste.
If any of you have ever had a cold
or you have for whatever reason
you've lost your sense of smell,
you become what they call anosmic,
your sense of taste suffers also.
We'll talk a little bit more
about why that is in a few minutes,
but as a first protocol,
I'd really like all of you to consider
becoming nasal breathers
while you're trying to learn,
while you're trying to listen,
while you're trying to wake
up your brain in any way
and learn and retain information,
this is a powerful tool.
Now, there are other ways
to wake up your brain more as well.
For instance, the use of smelling salts.
I'm not recommending that
you do this necessarily,
but there are excellent peer reviewed data
showing that indeed, if
you use smelling salts,
which are mostly of the
sort that include ammonia,
ammonia is a very toxic scent,
but it's toxic in a way that
triggers this innate pathway,
the pathway from the nose to the amygdala,
and wakes up the brain
and body in a major way.
This is why they use smelling salts
when people pass out,
this is why fighters used to use
or maybe sometimes
still use smelling salts
in order to heighten
their level of alertness,
this is why powerlifters
will inhale smelling salts.
They work because they trigger the fear
and kind of overall arousal
systems of the brain,
this is why I think most
people probably shouldn't
use ammonia or smelling
salts to try and wake up,
but they really do work.
If you've ever smelled smelling salts
and I have, I tried this,
they give you a serious jolt,
it's like six espresso
infused into your bloodstream all at once,
you are wide awake immediately
and you feel a heightened
sense of kind of desire to move
because you release
adrenaline into your body.
Now, inhaling through your nose
and doing nasal breathing
is not going to do that,
it's going to be a more subtle
version of waking up your system
of alerting your brain overall.
And for those of you that are
interested in having a richer,
a more deep connection
to the things that you smell and taste,
including other individuals
perhaps not just food,
practicing or enhancing
your sense of sniffing,
your ability to sniff
might sound like a kind
of ridiculous protocol,
but it's actually a kind
of fun and cool experiment
that you can do.
You just do the simple
experiment of taking for instance
an orange, you smell it,
try and gauge your level of perception
of how orange-ish it smells,
or lemony, lemonish, lemony, I don't know
is it lemonish or lemony?
Lemony it smells, then set it away,
do 10 or 15 inhales
[Andrew inhales and exhales]
followed by exhales of course,
or just through the nose.
[Andrew breaths rapidly]
I'm not going to do all 10 or 15.
And then smell it again,
and you'll notice that your
perception of that smell,
the kind of richness of that smell
will be significantly increased.
And that's again, for two reasons,
one, the brain is in a position
to respond to it better,
your brain has been aroused
by the mere act of sniffing,
but also the neurons that respond
to that lemon odor, that lemony or odor
are going to respond better.
So, you can actually have
a heightened experience
of something, and that of
course will also be true
for the taste system.
You also can really
train your sense of smell
to get much, much better.
When Noam Sobel's group was at Berkeley
I happened to be a graduate
student around that time,
and every once in a while I'd look outside
and there would be people
crawling around on the grass
with goggles on, gloves on,
and these hoods on with earmuffs.
And they looked ridiculous,
but what they were doing
is they were actually
learning to follow scent trails.
So, in the world of dogs
you have sight hounds that use their eyes
in order to navigate and find things,
and you have scent towns
that use their nose.
And the scent hounds are remarkable,
they can be trained to detect a scent.
These are the sniffing,
you know, the bomb sniffing
and the drug sniffing dogs in airports.
There are now dogs actually that can sniff
out COVID infections with a
very high degree of accuracy,
they can be trained to do that.
There's something about the COVID
and similar infections
that the body produces
probably in the immune response,
some odors and the dogs
are I think as high as 90%
in some cases, maybe even 95% accuracy,
just remarkable.
There are theories that
dogs can sniff out cancer,
this stuff all exceeds
statistical significance.
It's still a little bit
mysterious in some ways,
but you may not ever achieve
the olfactory capabilities
of a scent hound,
but what Noam Sobel's lab
did is they had people
completely eliminate
their visual experience
by having them wear
dark glasses or goggles,
so they couldn't see,
and they couldn't hear,
they couldn't sense anything
with their sense of touch,
they had thick gloves on.
But they had these masks on
where just their nasal passages were open
and people could in a
fairly short amount of time
learn to follow a chocolate
scent trail on the ground,
which is not something that
most people want to do,
but what they showed using
brain imaging, et cetera
in subsequent studies
is that the human brain,
you can learn to really
enhance your sense of smell
and become very astute in distinguishing
whether or not one particular odor
or combinations of odors
is such that it's less than,
or more than a different
odor for instance.
Now, why would you want to do this?
Well, if you like to eat as much as I do,
one of the things
that can really enhance
your sense of pleasure
from the experience of ingesting food
is to enhance your sense of smell.
And if you don't have
a great sense of smell,
or if you have a sense of smell
that's really so good that it's
always picking up bad odors,
we'll talk about that in a minute.
Well, then you might want to
tune up your sense of smell
by doing this practice
of 10 or 15 breaths,
excuse me, sniffs, not breaths,
sniffs and then interacting
with some food item
or thing that you're
interested in smelling more of.
So, these could be the ingredients
that you're cooking with,
I really encourage you to
try and really smell them.
You sometimes hear this
as kind of a mindfulness practice
like ooh, really smell the
food, really taste the food.
And we always hear about that
as kind of a mindfulness
and presence thing,
but you actually can
increase the sensitivity
of your olfactory and your
taste system by doing this.
And it has long-term effects,
that's what's so interesting.
This isn't the kind of thing
that you have to do every time you eat.
You don't have to be the
weirdo in the restaurant
that's like picking up the radish
and like jamming it up your
nostrils, please don't do that.
You don't have to
necessarily smell everything,
although it's nice
sometimes to smell the food
that you're about to
eat and as you eat it,
but it has long-term effects
in terms of your ability to distinguish
and discriminate different types of odors.
And these don't even have
to be very pungent foods
it turns out,
the studies show that doesn't have
to be some really stinky cheese,
you know, there are cheese shops
that I've walked into where
like I just basically gag,
I can't handle it, I
just can't be in there,
it just overwhelms me.
Other people, they love that smell.
So, you have to tune it to
your interest and experience,
but I think even for
you fasters out there,
everybody eats at some point,
everybody ingests chemicals
through their mouth.
And one of the ways that
you can powerfully increase
your relationship to that experience
and make it much more positive
is through just the occasional practice
of 10 or 15 sniffs of nothing,
which almost sounds ridiculous
like how could that be?
But now, you understand why,
it's because of the way that
the sniffing action increases
the alertness of the brain
as well as increasing the
sensitivity of the system.
No other system that
I'm aware of in our body
is as amenable to these kinds
of behavioral training shifts
and allow them to happen so quickly.
I would love to be able to tell you
that just doing 10 or 15
near-far exercises with a pen
or going outside for 10
or 15 seconds each morning
is going to completely change
the way that you see the world.
But it actually isn't the case,
you actually, it requires more training,
a little bit more effort
in the visual system.
In the olfactory system,
and your smell system,
and in your taste system
just the tiniest bit of
training and attention,
and sniffing, inhaling
can radically change
your relationship to food
such that you actually
start to feel very different
as a consequence of ingesting those foods
as well as becoming more
discerning about which foods
you like and which ones you don't like.
And we're going to talk about that
because there's a really wonderful thing
that happens when you start
developing a sensitive palate
and a sensitive sense of smell
in a way that allows
you to guide your eating
and smelling decisions,
and maybe even interpersonal decisions
about who you spend time with,
or mate with, or whatever,
in a way that is really
in line with your biology.
In fact, how well we can
smell and taste things
is actually a very strong
indication of our brain health.
Now, that's not to say
that if you have a poor sense of smell
or a poor sense of taste, that
you're somehow brain damaged
or you're going to have dementia,
although sometimes early signs of dementia
or loss of neurons in
other regions of the brain
related to say Parkinson's
can show up first
as a loss of sense of smell.
Again, it's not causal,
and it's certainly not
the case that every time
you have a sudden loss of smell
that there's necessarily brain damage,
I want to be very about that,
but they are often correlated.
There's also a lot of interest right now
in loss of sense of smell
because one of the early
detection signs of COVID-19
was a loss of sense of smell.
So, I just briefly want to talk
about loss of sense of smell
and regaining sense of smell and taste
because these have powerful
implications for overall health.
And in fact can indicate
something about brain damage
and can even inform how
quickly we might be recovering
from something like a concussion.
So, our olfactory neurons,
these neurons in our
nose that detect odors
are really unique among
other brain neurons
because they get
replenished throughout life,
they don't just regenerate,
but they get replenished.
So regeneration is when something
is damaged and it regrows,
these neurons are constantly turning
over throughout our lifespan,
they're constantly being replenished,
they're dying off and they're
being replaced by new ones.
This is an amazing aspect of our brain
that's basically unique to these neurons,
there's one other region of the brain
where there's a little bit of this maybe,
but these olfactory neurons
about every three or four weeks they die.
And when they die, they're replaced
by new ones that come from a
different region of the brain,
a region called the subventricular zone.
The name isn't as important,
but as the phenomenon,
but these neurons are
born in the ventricle,
the area of your brain that's
a hole that contains...
It's not an empty hole,
it's a hole basically that
contains cerebral spinal fluid.
Well, there's a little
subventricular zone,
there's a little zone
below, sub ventricles.
And that zone, if you
are exercising regularly,
if your dopamine levels are high enough,
those little cells there
are like stem cells.
They are stem cells and they spit out
what are called little neuroblasts,
those little neuroblasts migrate
into the front of your
brain and then shimmy,
they kind of move through
what's called the
rostral migratory stream.
They kind of shimmy along
and land back in your olfactory bulb,
settle down and extend little wires
into your olfactory mucosa.
This is an ongoing process
of what we call neurogenesis
or the birth of new neurons.
Now, this is really interesting
because other neurons in
your cortex, in your retina,
in your cerebellum, they do not do this,
they are not continually
replenished throughout life.
But these neurons, these
olfactory neurons are,
they are special.
And there are a number of things
that seem to increase the amount
of olfactory neuron neurogenesis.
There is evidence that
exercise, blood flow,
can increase olfactory
neuron neurogenesis.
Although, those data are fewer
in comparison to things
like social interactions,
or actually interacting with
odorants of different kinds.
So, if you're somebody who
doesn't smell things well,
you have a poor sense of smell,
your olfactory system
doesn't seem very sensitive,
more sniffing, more smelling
is going to be good.
And then the molecule
dopamine, this neuromodulator,
that is associated with
motivation and drive.
And in some cases, if it's
very, very high with mania,
or if it's very, very low with
depression or Parkinson's,
but for most people where dopamine
is in essentially normal ranges
dopamine is also a powerful
trigger of the establishment
of these new neurons and their migration
into the olfactory bulb
and your ability to smell.
Now, you don't want to confuse
correlation with causation,
so if you're not good at smelling
does that mean you have low dopamine?
No, not necessarily.
If you have low dopamine,
does that mean that you
have a poor sense of smell?
No, not necessarily.
Some people who take
antidepressants of the sort
that impact the dopamine
system strongly like Wellbutrin
will report a sudden, meaning
within a couple of days,
increase in their ability
to smell particular odors,
and it's a very striking effect.
Some people when they
are in a new relationship
because dopamine and the hormones,
testosterone and estrogen
are associated with novelty
and the sorts of behaviors
that often are associated
with new relationships
those three molecules;
dopamine, testosterone, and
estrogen kind of work together.
And oftentimes people will say
or report when they're newly in love
or in a new relationship that
they're just obsessed with,
or they just so enjoy the
scent of another person
so much so that they like to borrow
the other person's clothing
or they'll sniff the
other person's clothing
or they can even just in
the absence of the person
they can imagine their smell
and feel a biological response,
something that we'll talk more about.
So, these neurons turnover
throughout the lifespan
and as we age, we actually
can lose our sense of smell.
And it's likely, I want
to underscore likely,
that that loss of sense of smell as we age
is correlated with a loss of other neurons
in the retina, in the
ears, a loss of vision,
loss of hearing, loss of smell,
loss of the sense apparati
which our neurons is
correlated with aging.
So, what we've been talking about today
is the ability to sense these odors,
but what I'd like to do
is empower you with tools
that will allow you to keep
these systems tuned up.
Last time, we talked about tuning up
and keeping your visual
system tuned up and healthy
regardless of age.
Here, we're talking about really enhancing
your olfactory abilities,
your taste abilities as well
by interacting a lot with odors,
preferably positive odors,
and sniffing more, inhaling more,
which almost sounds crazy,
but now you understand why.
Even though it might sound crazy
it's grounded in real mechanistic biology
of how the brain wakes up and
responds to these chemicals.
Now, speaking of brain injury,
olfactory dysfunction is a common theme
in traumatic brain injury
for the following reason,
these olfactory neurons as I mention
extend wires into the mucosa of the nose,
but they also extend a
wire up into the skull.
And they extend up into the skull
through what's called
the cribriform plate,
it's like a Swiss cheese type plate
where they're going through.
And if you get a head hit,
that bone, the cribriform plate,
sheers those little wires off
and those neurons die.
Now, eventually they'll be replaced,
but there's a phenomenon
by which concussion
and the severity of concussion
and the recovery from a head injury
can actually be gauged in part,
in part, not in whole,
but in part by how well
or fully one recovers
their sense of smell.
So, if you're somebody that unfortunately
has suffered a concussion,
your sense of smell is one readout
by which you might evaluate
whether or not you're regaining
some of your sensory performance.
Of course, there will be others
like balance, and cognition,
and sleep, et cetera.
But I'd like to refer you
to a really nice paper
which is entitled Olfactory Dysfunction
in Traumatic Brain Injury:
the Role of Neurogenesis
the first author is Marin, M-A-R-I-N.
The paper was published
in Current Allergy and
Asthma Report, this is 2020.
I spent some time with this
paper, it's quite good,
it's a review article,
I like reviews if they're
peer-reviewed reviews
and in quality journals.
And what they discuss
is and I'll just read here briefly
'cause they said it better than I could,
"Olfactory functioning
disturbances are common
following traumatic brain injury, TBI,
and can have a significant
impact on the quality of life.
Although there is no standard
treatment for patients
with the loss of smell."
Now I'm paraphrasing,
"Post-injury olfactory training
has shown promise for beneficial effects.
Some of this involves,"
they go on to tell us
the role of dopamine,
dopaminergic signaling,
as I mentioned before,
but what does this mean?
This means that if
you've had a head injury
or repeated head injuries that
enhancing your sense of smell
is one way by which you
can create new neurons.
And now, you know how to
enhance your sense of smell
by interacting with things
that have an odor very closely,
and by essentially inhaling more,
focusing on the inhale
to wake up the brain
and to really focus on some
of the nuance of those smells.
So, you might do for instance a smell test
by which you smell something like a lemon,
put it down, do 10 inhales or so,
smell again, et cetera.
You might also just
take a more active role
in trying to taste and smell your food,
and taste and smell various things.
I mean, please don't ingest anything
that's poisonous that you're
not supposed to be ingesting,
but you know what I mean,
really tuning up this system,
I think is an excellent review,
we're going to do an entire episode
all about the use of the
visual system in particular,
but also the olfactory
system for treatment
of traumatic brain injury,
as well as other methods.
But I wanted to just mention it here
because a number of
people asked me about TBI.
And here again, we're in
this place where the senses
and our ability to sense these chemicals
through these two holes
in the front of our face,
our nostrils is a powerful readout
and way to control brain function
and nervous system function generally.
Just a quick note about
the use of smelling salts,
I have a feeling that some of
you may be interested in that
and its application.
If you are interested in that,
I recommend you go to the
scientific literature first
rather than straight to some vendor
or to the what do they call it these days?
Costello bro science, he says,
bro science, the bro science.
You can go to this
paper, which is excellent
and is real science, which
is Acute Effects of Ammonia
Inhalants on Strength and Power
Performance in Trained Men.
It's a randomized controlled
trial, it was published
in the Journal of Strength
and Conditioning Research
in 2018, and it should
be very easy to find.
I will provide a link to
the so-called PubMed ID,
which is a string of numbers,
and we'll put that in the caption
if you want to go
straight to that article,
does show a significant what they call,
this is what the words they
use literally in quotes,
"psyching up effect through the use
of these ammonia inhalants
and a significant
increase in maximal force
in force development in a
variety of different movements."
So, for those of you that are interested
in ammonia inhalants,
so-called smelling salts,
that might be a good reference.
The other thing I wanted to talk about
with reference to odors is this myth
which is that we don't actually
smell things in our dreams,
that we don't have a sense of smell.
That's pure fiction, I don't
know who came up with that,
it's very clear that we are capable
of smelling things in our sleep.
However, when we are in REM sleep,
rapid eye movement sleep,
which is the sleep that predominates
toward the second half of the night
our ability to wake up in
response to odors is diminished.
It's not absent, but it's diminished.
If smoke comes into the
room, we will likely wake up
if the concentration
of smoke is high enough
regardless of the stage of sleep we're in,
but in REM sleep we tend to be less likely
to smell, to sniff.
And that actually was measured
in a number of studies
that sniffing in sleep is possible.
So, if you put an odor like a lemon
underneath someone's nostrils
in the early portion of
the night, they will smell,
and they will later...
They will sniff, excuse me,
whether or not they smell or
not, I guess depends on them
and when they showered last,
but they will definitely sniff
and they will report later,
especially if you wake them up
soon after that, they had a dream
or a percept of the scent
of a lemon for instance.
Later in the night, it's
harder for that relationship
to be established,
it's likely that because
of some of the paralysis
associated with rapid eye movement sleep,
which is a healthy paralysis,
so-called sleep atonia,
you don't want to act out
your dreams in REM sleep
that there is a less
active tendency to sniff.
And actually this has real
clinical implications,
the ability to sniff
in response to the introduction of an odor
is actually one way in
which clinicians assess
whether or not somebody's
brain is so-called brain dead.
That's not a nice term, but brain dead,
or whether or not they have the capacity
to recover from things like coma
and other states of deep unconsciousness,
or I guess you'd call it subconsciousness.
So, what will happen is
if someone has an injury
and they're essentially out cold,
the production of a sniffing reflex,
or a sniffing response to say a lemon
or some other odor
presented below the nostrils
is considered a sign that the
brain is capable of waking up.
Now, that's not always the
case, but it's one indication.
So just like you could
use mechano sensation,
so, a toe pinch for instance,
you know, or scraping the
bottom of somebody's barefoot
to see if they're conscious,
or shining light in their eyes,
these are all things that you've seen
in movies and television,
or maybe if you've seen
in real life as well.
Well, odors and chemical
sensing is another way
by which you can assess
whether or not the brain
is capable of arousal.
And actually olfactory stimulation
is one of the more prominent ones
that's being used in various clinics.
As a last point about
specific odors and compounds
that can increase arousal and alertness,
and this was simply through sniffing them
not through ingesting them.
There are data, believe it
or not, there are good data
on peppermint and the smell of peppermint,
minty type sense,
whether you like them or
not will increase attention,
and they can create the same
sort of arousal response
although not as intensely
or as dramatically as ammonia
salts can for instance.
By the way, please don't
go sniff real ammonia,
you could actually damage
your olfactory epithelium
if you do that too close to the ammonia.
If you're going to use smelling salts
be sure you work with someone
or you know what you're getting
and how you're using this.
You can damage your olfactory pathway
in ways that are pretty severe,
you can also damage your vision.
If you've ever teared up
because you inhaled something
that was really noxious,
that is not a good thing,
it doesn't mean you
necessarily cause damage,
but it means that you have
irritated the mucosal lining
and possibly even the
surfaces of your eyes,
so please be very, very careful.
Scents like peppermint,
like these ammonia smelling salts,
the reason they wake you up
is because they trigger
specific olfactory neurons
that communicate with the
specific centers of the brain,
namely the amygdala and
associated neurocircuitry
and pathways that trigger alertness
of the same sort that a
cold shower or an ice bath,
or a sudden surprise,
or a stressful text message would evoke.
Remember, the systems of your
body that produce arousal,
and alertness, and attention,
and that cue you for
optimal learning, aka focus.
Those are very general mechanisms,
they involve very basic
molecules like adrenaline
and epinephrin same thing actually,
adrenaline and epinephrin.
The number of stimuli, whether
it's peppermint or ammonia,
or a loud blast,
the number of stimuli that can evoke
that adrenaline response
and that wake up response
are near infinite.
And that's the beauty
of your nervous system,
it was designed to take any
variety of different stimuli
placed them into categories,
and then evoke different categories
of very general responses.
Now, you know a lot about olfaction
and how the sense of smell works,
here's another experiment that you can do.
I'll ask you right now.
Do you like, hate, or are you indifferent
to the smell of microwave popcorn?
Some people, including one
member of my podcast staff
says it's absolutely disgusting to them,
they feel like it's completely nauseating.
I don't mind it at all,
in fact, I kind of like it.
I think the smell of a microwave popcorn
is kind of pleasant.
I don't particularly like it,
but it's certainly not unpleasant.
Some people have a gene
that makes them sensitive
to the smell of things
like microwave popcorn
such that it smells like vomit.
I probably don't have that gene
because I find the smell
of microwaved popcorn pretty pleasant.
Some people hate the smell of cilantro,
some people ingest asparagus,
and when they urinate they
can smell the asparagus
in a very pungent way,
other people can't smell it at all.
These are variants in genes that encode
for what are called olfactory receptors.
Each olfactory sensory neuron
expresses one odorant gene,
one gene that codes for a receptor
that responds to a particular odor.
If you don't have that gene
you will not respond to that odor.
So, the reason why some
people find the smell
of microwave popcorn to be
very noxious, putrid in fact,
is because they have a
gene that allows them
to smell the kind of
putrid odor within that.
Other people who lack that gene
just simply can't smell it,
so we are not all the same
with respect to our sensory experience.
What one person finds delicious,
another person might find disgusting.
I'll give a good example
which is that I absolutely despise
Gorgonzola and blue cheese,
absolutely despise it,
it smells and tastes
like dirty moldy socks to me.
Some people love it, they crave it,
actually, some people get
a visceral response to it,
and we will talk about how certain tastes
can actually evoke very
deep biological responses,
even hormonal responses
when we talk about taste in a few minutes.
But there are these odors,
for instance in popcorn
it's the molecule 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline,
not proline but pyrroline,
that gives off to some people like me
a toasted smell as the
sugars in the kernels heat,
but the compound is also found
in things like white
bread and jasmine rice,
which don't have as pungent an odor,
but some people smell that
and it smells like cat urine.
Now, there are scents like
musky scents and musty scents
that are secreted by animals like skunks
and other animals of the
so-called Mustelidae family.
So, these would be ferrets and
other animals that can spray
in response to fear, or if they
just want to mark a territory
because they want to say that's mine.
Dogs incidentally have scent
glands that they rub on things,
cats have them too.
This musty odor, some people
find actually quite pleasant,
some people find it to be very noxious
and that will depend of course
on the concentration, right?
I'll never forget the first time
Costello got sprayed by
a skunk and it was awful.
I actually don't mind the
smell of skunk at a distance,
it's actually a little bit pleasant,
I admit it's a little bit pleasant to me.
I don't think that makes me too weird
because if you ever read the book
"All Quiet on the Western
Front" about World War I,
there's a description in
there about the smell of skunk
at a distance being mildly pleasant,
so the author of that book probably shared
a similar olfactory profile
to me, or I to them rather,
but some people find even the tiniest bit
of the smell of skunk or
musk to be noxious or awful.
Now, of course in high
concentrations, it's really awful.
And unfortunately, poor Costello,
he was like literally
red-eyed and just snorting,
and it was awful.
There's a joke about
dogs that says that dogs
either get skunked one
time and never again
or 50 or a hundred times.
Costello has been skunked no fewer,
I'm not making this up,
has been skunked no fewer than 103 times.
And that's because if he sees something
or hears something in the
bushes, he just goes straight in,
he does not learn.
But if you like this, that
musty scent or musky scent,
well that says something about
the genes that you express
in your olfactory neurons,
it is completely inherited.
And if you don't like that scent,
if it's really noxious
or you have this response
to microwave popcorn,
well, that means you have
a different compliment,
a different constellation if you will
of genes that make up for
these olfactory sensory neurons
and the receptors that they express.
Let's talk about taste.
Not whether or not you have
taste or you don't have taste,
there's no way for me to assess that,
but rather how we taste things,
meaning how we sense chemicals
in food and in drink.
There are essentially five,
but scientists now believe
there may be six things
that we taste alone or in combination,
they are sweet tastes,
salty tastes, bitter tastes,
sour tastes, and umami taste.
Most of you probably
heard of umami by now,
it's U-M-A-M-I.
Umami is actually the name
for a particular receptor
that you express on your tongue
that detects savory tastes,
so it's the kind of
thing in braised meats.
Sometimes people can even
get the activation of umami
by tomatoes or tomato sauces.
What are each of these tastes
and taste receptors responsible for?
And then we'll talk about the sixth,
maybe you can guess what it is,
I don't know if you can guess it now.
I couldn't guess it,
but of the five tastes
each one has a specific
utility or function.
Each one has a particular
group of neurons in your mouth,
in your tongue, believe it or not,
that responds to particular chemicals
and particular chemical structures.
It is a total myth, complete fiction,
that different parts of your tongue
harbor different taste receptors.
You know, that high
school textbook diagram
that you know sweet is
in one part of the tongue
and sour is in another,
and bitters in another, complete fiction,
just total fiction related
to very old studies
that were performed in a
very poorly controlled way,
no serious biologists
and certainly no one that works on tastes
would contend that that's the way
that the taste receptors are organized,
they are completely
intermixed along your tongue.
If you have heightened
or decreased sensitivity
to one of those five things I mentioned;
sweet, salty, bitter, umami, or sour
at one location in your tongue,
it likely reflects the
density of overall receptors
or something going on in your brain,
but not the differential
distribution of those receptors.
So, the sweet receptors
are neurons that express
a receptor that respond to sugars,
in the same way that you
have cones, photoreceptors,
in your eye that respond to short,
medium, or long wavelength light,
meaning blueish, greenish,
or reddish light.
You have a neuron, or neurons plural,
in your tongue that respond to sugars.
And then those neurons,
they don't say sweet,
they don't actually send
any sugar into the brain,
they send what we call a volley,
a barrage of action potentials
of electrical signals
off into the brain.
It's an amazing system.
So, all these receptors in your tongue
make up what are called the neurons
that give rise to a nerve,
a collection of wires, nerve bundles
of what's called the gustatory nerve,
it goes from the tongue
to the so-called nucleus
of the solitary tract.
And some of you requested names,
I usually don't like to
include too many names
for sake of clarity,
but the gustatory nerve from the tongue
goes to the nucleus of the solitary tract
and then to the thalamus
and to insular cortex.
You don't have to remember
any of those names
if you don't want to,
but if you want mechanism,
you want neural circuits,
that's the circuit, gustatory
nerve from the tongue,
nucleus of the solitary
tract in the brainstem,
then the thalamus, and
then insular cortex.
And it is in insular cortex,
this regenerate cortex that we sort out
and make sense of and
perceive the various tastes.
Now, it's amazing because
just taking a little bit
of sugar or something sour
like a little bit of lemon juice
and touching it to the tongue
within 100 milliseconds, right?
Just 100 milliseconds,
far less than one second,
you can immediately distinguish
ah, that's sour,
that sweet, that's bitter, that's umami,
and that's an assessment
that's made by the cortex.
Now, what to these different
five receptors encode for?
Well, sweet, salty, bitter, umami, sour,
but what are they really looking for?
What are they sensing?
Well, sweet stuff signals the
presence of energy, of sugars.
And while we're all trying
or we're told that we
should eat less sugar
for a variety of reasons,
the ability to sense whether or not a food
has rapid energy source
or could give rise to glucose is essential
so we have sweet receptors.
The salty receptors, these
neurons are trying to sense
whether or not there are electrolytes
in a given food or drink.
Electrolytes are vitally important
for the function of our nervous system,
and for our entire body,
sodium is what allows neurons to fire.
What allows them to be
electrically active.
We also need potassium and magnesium,
those are the ions that allow
the neurons to be active.
So the salty receptors,
the reason that they are there
is to make sure that
we are getting enough,
but not too much salt,
we don't want to ingest
things that are far too salty.
Bitter receptors are there
to make sure we don't ingest
things that are poisonous.
How do I know this?
How can I say that?
Even though I was definitely not consulted
at the design phase, how can I say that?
Well, the bitter receptors
create a what we call labeled line,
a unique trajectory to the neurons
of the brainstem that control the [gags],
the gag reflex.
If we taste something very bitter
it automatically triggers the gag reflex.
Now, some people like bitter taste,
I actually liked the
taste of bitter coffee,
children generally like sweet tastes
more than bitter tastes,
but even babies if they
taste something bitter,
they'll just immediately spit it up,
it's like the gag reflex.
Putrid smells will also
evoke the same neurons,
so some people are very sensitive,
they have a very sensitive
or low threshold vomit reflex,
you're going to and there was
somebody in my lab early on.
And we never did this intentionally,
and we're just laughing
'cause it was so dramatic.
How we would have a discussion,
someone would say something
about something kind of gross,
appropriate for the workplace,
but nonetheless gross,
we are biologists,
would say something and they
would say, "Stop, stop stop,
I'm going to throw up."
You know and some people
have a very low threshold
quick gag reflex.
Other people don't, other people
have a very stable stomach,
they don't, you know,
they rarely, if ever vomit.
The umami receptor isn't sensing savory
because the body loves savory,
it's because savory is a signal
for the presence of amino acids.
And we'll talk more about this,
but the presence of amino acids
in our gut and in our digestive system,
and the presence of
fatty acids is essential,
there is in fact, no essential
carbohydrate or sugar.
Now, I'm not a huge
proponent of ketogenic diets
nor am I against them, I
think it's highly individual,
you have to decide what's right for you,
but everybody needs
amino acids to survive,
the brain needs them
and we need fatty acids,
especially to build a healthy
brain during development,
you need amino acids and fatty acids.
And the sour receptor, why
would we have a sour receptor?
So, that we could have those
really like sour candies?
I think they've gotten more
and more sour over the years.
I admit I don't eat candy much,
but I do have a particular weakness
for like a really good
really sour like gummy peach
or they if the gummy cherries are dipped
in whatever that sour powder,
so I was a kid who I admit it,
I liked the LIK-M-AID thing,
I'd like drink the powder.
Please don't do this, don't
give this garbage to your kids,
but I liked it, it was tasty,
but sour receptors are not there
so that you can ingest
gummy sour gummy peaches
or something like that, that's
not why the system evolved,
it's there and we know it's there
to detect the presence of
spoiled or fermented food.
Fermented fruit has a sour element to it,
and fermented things while
certainly some fermented foods
like sauerkraut, and kimchi,
and things of that sort
can be very healthy for us
and are very healthy in
reducing inflammation,
there's great data on that,
pro quality microbiome, et cetera.
Fermented fruit can be poisonous, right?
Alcohols are poisonous in
many forms to our system
and the sour receptor bearing neurons
communicate to an area of the brainstem
that evokes the pucker response,
closing of the eyes and
essentially shutting of the mouth,
and cringing away.
I think cringe is like a thing now,
my niece, whenever I seem to
say something or do something
it's either an eye-roll, a
cringe, or both in combination.
So the sour, the sweet,
the salty, the bitter,
and the umami system,
were not there so that we could
have this wonderful pallet
of foods that we enjoy so much,
they'll allow us to do that,
but they're there to make sure
that we bring in certain things
to our system and that we
don't ingest other things.
Now, what's the sixth sense
within the taste system?
Not sixth sense generally,
but within the taste system.
What's this putative
possible sixth receptor?
I already kind of hinted at it
when I talked about fatty acids,
there are now data to support the idea
although there's still more
work that needs to be done
that we also have receptors
on our tongue that sense fat.
And that because fat is
so vital for the function
of our nervous system and
the other organs of our body
that we are sensing the
fat content in food,
maybe this is why I can only eat half,
but no less than half of
a jar of almond butter
or peanut butter in one sitting.
I just can't, unless it's not salted,
in which case, it makes no sense to me.
But it's remarkable how that texture,
and also the flavor,
but that texture of fat.
I love butter, I am guilty,
and Costello is definitely
guilty of eating pats of butter
from time to time, I
have no guilt about this.
People eat pats of cheese,
why shouldn't we eat a pat of butter?
If you think that's gross
then maybe I have a greater abundance
of the fat receptors in my tongue,
maybe I have a fat tongue than you do.
But nonetheless, the ability
to sense fat here in our mouth
seems to be critical,
you can imagine why that is.
I want to talk about the tongue
and the mouth as an extension
of your digestive tract.
I know that might not be
pleasant to think about,
but when you look at it
through the lens that
I'm about to provide,
it will completely
change the way you think
about the gut brain
and about all the stuff that you've heard
in these recent years about
oh, we have this second brain,
it's all these neurons in our gut,
I've been chuckling through
these last few years
as people have gotten so
excited about the gut brain,
not because of their excitement,
I think that excitement is wonderful,
but we always knew that the nervous system
extended out of the
brain and into the body,
and people seem kind of overwhelmed
and surprised by the idea that
we have neurons in our gut
that can sense things like
sugars and fatty acids.
And I think those are
beautiful discoveries,
don't get me wrong.
Diego Bohorquez's lab
out of Duke University
has done beautiful studies showing that
within the mucosal lining of our gut
we have neurons that sense fatty acids,
sugars, and amino acids,
and that when we ingest something
that contains one or two
or three of those things,
there's a signal sent via the vagus nerve
up into what's called the nodose ganglion,
N-O-D-O-S-E,
and then into the brain
where it secretes dopamine
which makes us want more of that thing,
it makes us more motivated to pursue
and eat more of that thing,
that's either fatty, or umami, savory,
or has a sweet taste,
any one or two or three
of those qualities,
independent of the taste.
Now, I think those are beautiful data,
but we know that this thing, the mouth.
And for those of you listening
I've just got my couple
of fingers in my mouth,
that's why I sound like I've
got something in my mouth.
This thing in the front of our face,
we use it for speaking,
but it is the front of
our digestive tract.
We are essentially a series of tubes
and that tube starts with your mouth
and heads down into your stomach.
And so, that you would sense
so much of the chemical constituents
of the stuff that you
might bring into your body
or that you might want
to expel and not swallow
or not interact with by being
able to smell is it putrid?
Does it smell good?
Does it taste good?
Is this safe?
Is it salty?
Is it so sour that it's fermented
and it's going to poison me?
Is it so bitter that it could poison me?
Is it so savory that, mmm,
yes. I want more and more of this.
Well, then you'd want to trigger dopamine,
that's all starting in the mouth.
So, you have to understand
that you were equipped
with this amazing chemical
sensing apparatus,
we call your mouth and your tongue.
And those little bumps on your tongue
that they call the papillae,
those are not your taste buds.
Surrounding those little papillae
like little rivers are these
little dents and indentations.
And what dents and
indentations do in a tissue
is they allow more surface area,
they allow you to pack more receptors.
So, down in those grooves are
where all these little neurons
and their little processes are
with these little receptors
for sweet, salty, bitter, umami, sour,
and maybe fat as well.
And so, it's this incredible device
that you've been equipped with,
that you can use to interact
with various components
of the outside world
and decide whether or not you
want to bring them in or not.
Just as you can lose
those olfactory neurons,
if you happen to get hit on the head
or you have some other thing,
maybe it was an infection that caused loss
of those olfactory sensory neurons,
you can also lose taste
receptors in your mouth.
If you've ever eaten
something that's too hot,
not spicy hot, but too hot,
you burn your tongue, you burn receptors.
It takes about a week to
recover those receptors.
For some people it's a
little bit more quickly,
but if you burn your tongue badly
by ingesting a soup that's too hot
or a beverage that's too hot,
you will greatly reduce
your sense of taste
for essentially all tastes.
And that's because those
neurons sit very shallow
beneath the tongue's surface,
and so that if you put
something too hot on,
you literally just burn
those neurons away.
Luckily those neurons also
can replenish themselves.
Those neurons are of the
peripheral nervous system,
and like all peripheral system neurons
they can replenish or regenerate.
So, if you burn your mouth
in about a week or so
hopefully sooner you'll
be able to taste again.
In fact, everybody's ability to taste
is highly subject to training.
You can really enhance
your ability to taste
and taste the different component
parts of different foods
simply by paying attention to
what you're trying to taste,
this is an amazing aspect
of the taste system.
I think more than any other system,
the taste system and perhaps
the smell system as well
can be trained so that you can
learn to pick out the tones,
if you will of different ice cream,
or different beverages.
I'm somebody who, you know,
I don't drink much alcohol,
I'll occasionally have
a drink or something,
but a while ago I got to
taste a bunch of different
white tequilas, these are
different kinds of tequilas
that are, they're not
brown, they're white.
And I sort of assumed that
all tequila was disgusting,
that was my assumption before doing this.
And then I tasted a
couple of white tequilas
and I realized oh, those
aren't aren't too bad.
I tasted a few more,
and then pretty soon I
could really start to detect
the nuance and the difference.
Now, I haven't had a
tequilas in a long time,
now I sort of tend to not
drink at all these days,
but in a very short period
of time like a couple of days
I got very good at detecting
which things I liked
and I could start to pick out tones.
So, I'm not a wine drinker,
but for those of you that are,
you know, you hear about
oh, it has floral tones,
or berry tones, or chocolate tones.
You know, some of that is
just kind of menu-based
and kind of marketing-based silliness
designed to get you excited
about what you're about to ingest.
But some of it is real,
and for people that are skilled
in assessing wines or assessing foods.
I'm much more of an eater than a drinker,
you can really start to
develop a sensitive palate,
a nuanced palette through what
we call top-down mechanisms.
This olfactory cortex
that takes these five,
maybe the sixth fat receptor too,
information and tries to make sense
of what's out there in the world.
And what its utility is,
is it good? Is it bad?
Do I want more of it or less than it?
That neural circuitry is
unlike other neural circuitry
in that it seems very amenable
to behavioral plasticity
for whatever reason,
and we could talk about
what those reasons might be.
You know, it's interesting sometimes
to think about how your taste
literally, chemical taste,
is probably very different
than that of other people,
how a food tastes to you
is probably very different
than how it tastes to somebody else.
The same probably cannot
be said of something
like vision or hearing,
unless you're somebody
who has perfect pitch or your
color vision is disrupted,
or you're a mantis shrimp,
chances are when we
look at the same object
two people are seeing more
or less the same object
or perceiving it in a very similar way.
There are experiments that
essentially establish that.
Now we, have taste receptors
and a lot of those tastes receptors,
their chemical structures are known,
they come with fancy names
like the T1R1 or the T1R2,
which were identified as the
sweet and umami receptors.
So, what's interesting
is that this umami flavor
is the savory flavor rather
that's sensed by umami
receptors is very close
to the receptor that detects sweet things.
Similarly, bitter is sensed
by a whole other set of receptors.
Now, there's a fun naturally
occurring experiment
that will forever change the
way that you look at animals,
and the way certainly
that I think about dogs
and Costello in particular.
Carnivorous large animals like tigers
and some grizzly bears for instance,
we know that they have no
ability to detect sweet,
they don't actually have the receptors
for sweet on their tongue,
but their concentration of umami receptors
of their ability to detect savory
is at least 5,000 times
that which it is in humans.
In other words, if I eat
a little piece of steak,
or Costello eats a little piece of steak,
that steak probably tastes much,
much more savory than it does to me.
So dogs, and tigers, and bears, et cetera,
they're going to taste savory
things and smell savory things
with a much higher degree of sensitivity,
but they can't taste sweet things.
Other large animals, which
are mostly herbivores
like the panda bear for instance.
It's hard to believe that
thing is even a bear,
I got nothing against pandas,
I just think that they
get a little bit too much
of the limelight frankly.
So, no vendetta against
Panda, save the pandas,
I hope they replenish all the pandas,
but pandas in all their whatever
have no umami receptors,
they can't taste savory,
but they have greatly heightened
density of sweet receptors.
So, there they are eating
these whatever bamboos all day
or not bamboozle, but bamboos all day
and they can taste things
that are very sweet
with a much higher degree of intensity.
And in general, animals
that are more gentle
that are herbivores, excuse me.
Or animals that have the
propensity for aggression,
that's where you really see the divergence
of the umami receptor
because it's associated
with meat and amino acids.
And where you see the enhancement
of the sweet receptors
for animals that eat a
lot of plants and fruits,
and they probably taste
very different to them
than they do to you and me.
And, so it's interesting to note
that animals that eat meat,
that eat other organisms
can actually extract more
savory experience from that.
What does this mean for you?
All right, do you associate
yourself as a tiger,
or a grizzly bear, or a panda,
or a combination of both?
Most people are omnivores.
However, you may find it
interesting that people
that for instance eat a
pure carnivore type diet
or a keto diet where they
are ingesting a lot of meat,
so therefore are sensing
a lot of umami flavors.
And I realized not everyone
who's keto eats meat,
but those who do that will
develop a more sensitive palate
and likely there are some
data, although early data,
craving for umami-like foods.
Whereas people that eat
a more plant-based diet
are likely developing a
heightened sensitivity
and desire for, and maybe even
dopamine response to sugars
and plant-based foods.
Now, this is my partial
attempt to reconcile
the kind of online battle
that seems to exist
between plant-based versus animal-based,
purely plant-based or
purely animal-based diets.
I think most people are omnivores,
but it's kind of interesting to think
that the systems are plastic
such that people might want more meat
if they eat more meat,
people might want more plants
if they eat enough plants
for a long period of time.
And this might explain some
of the chasm that exists
between these two groups.
Now, this is not to say
anything about the ethical
or the environmental
impacts of different things,
I don't even want to get into that
because the meat people say
that the plant-based diets
have as much a negative impact
as the plant people say
that the meat based diets,
that's a totally different discussion.
What I'm talking about here is
food craving and food seeking
and one's ability to detect
these umami, savory flavors
is going to be enhanced
by ingesting more meat
and less activation of
the sweet receptors.
So in other words, the more meat you eat
the more you're going to become
like a tiger, so to speak.
And the more that you avoid
these umami flavors and meats
and the more that you
would eat plant-based foods
and in particular sweet foods,
the more you will likely
suppress that umami system
and that you will have
a heightened desire for,
appetite for and sensing of sweet foods
or foods that contain sugars.
What I'm about to tell you
is going to seem crazy,
but is extremely interesting
with respect to taste and taste receptors.
Remember, even though we can enjoy food
and we can evolve our sense
of what's tasty or not tasty,
depending on life decisions,
environmental changes, et cetera,
the taste system just
like the olfactory system
and the visual system
was laid down for the purpose
of moving towards things
that are good for us
and moving away from
things that are bad for us,
that's the kind of core
function of the nervous system.
Well, taste receptors are not
just expressed on the tongue,
they are expressed in other
cells and other tissues as well.
Some of you may be able to imagine foods
that are so delicious to you
that they make your entire body feel good.
Or foods that are so
horrifically awful to think about
let alone taste, that they
create a whole body shuddering
or kind of repellent-type response
where you just either cringe
or turn your face away
even in the absence of that food.
That's sort of how I feel about
pungent, Gorgonzola cheese.
If you like Gorgonzola
cheese, I don't judge you,
I just, that's an individual difference.
I happen to love certain foods,
I do like savory foods very much.
I, when I think about them,
they just they make me feel good.
And I'm oftentimes not even associating
with the taste of those foods,
it feels almost like a visceral thing.
Well, it turns out that
some of the taste receptors
extend beyond the tongue,
that they actually can extend
into portions of the gut
and digestive system.
And if that's not strange enough,
turns out that some of the taste receptors
are actually expressed on
the ovaries and the testes.
So, what that means is that the gonads,
the very cells, and tissues,
and organs in our body
that make up the reproductive axis
are expressing taste receptors.
Okay, so how do we interpret this?
Does this mean that when you eat something
that's very savory or
very sweet for instance,
that it's triggering activation
of the ovaries or of the testes?
Well, it's possible.
Now, how those molecules,
those chemical molecules
would actually get there
isn't clear, the digestive
track does not run directly
to the testes or to the ovaries.
But nonetheless, what this
means is that chemical sensing
of the very things that
we detect on our tongue
and that we call taste in quotes in food
is also evoking
cellular responses within
the reproductive gonads.
Now, whether or not this
underlies the positive association
that we have with certain
foods isn't clear,
but I'd be remiss if I
didn't point out the obvious,
which is that the relationship
between the sensual nature
of particular foods
and sensuality generally
and the reproductive axis
is something that's been
covered in many movies,
there are entire movies that are focused
on the relationship between for instance,
chocolate and love and
reproductive behaviors,
or certain feasts of meat
and their wonderful tastes
and the kind of sensuality around feasts
of different types of foods,
but in general, it's the
sweet and the savory,
rarely is it the sour or the
bitter, the salty or the fat.
And not surprisingly perhaps,
it is the T2Rs and the T1Rs,
the receptors that are
associated with the sweet
and with the umami, the savory flavors
that are expressed not just on the tongue
and in portions of the digestive tract,
but on the gonads themselves.
So, what does this mean?
Does this mean that eating certain foods
can stimulate the gonads?
Maybe, there's no data that immediately
support that right now, but
this is an emerging area.
If you'd like to read more about this
there's a great review,
entitled Taste perception:
From the tongue to the testis,
although they do also
talk about the ovaries.
Why they didn't include that in the title
is I think a reflection
of the bias of the author.
The author indeed not
incidentally is Feng Li,
last name L-I.
It's a very interesting paper published
in Molecular Human Reproduction.
You can find it easily
online, it's downloadable,
I'll also provide a link to it.
I just think it's fascinating
that these taste receptors are
expressed in other tissues.
And I should mention
that they're expressed
in tissues of other areas
of the body as well,
including the respiratory system,
but the richest aggregation
or concentration of these receptors
for umami and sweet of
course is on the tongue,
but also on the gonads.
And I think it does speak
to the possible bridge between
what we think of as a sensory
or a sensual experience of food
and the deeper kind of
visceral sense within the gut,
and maybe even within the gonads as well
of something that we find
extremely pleasurable,
or even appetitive that
we want to move toward it.
We are actually going to
return to that general theme
in the discussion about touch sensation.
Some people for instance,
when they touch certain
surfaces like furs,
or sheep skins, or velvet,
or soft, smooth surfaces
it feels good elsewhere in their body,
not just at the point of
contact with that surface.
And similarly, if there's the...
How about this one?
The screech of chalk on a
chalkboard, it's a sound,
but it has a very strong
visceral component,
or sandpaper, like
fingernails on a chalkboard,
not the sound, but the feeling, right?
Exactly, so our whole
nervous system is tuned
to either be drawn toward appetitive,
or repelled by aversive behaviors, right?
So there's this push-pull that exists,
and what I'm referring to
in terms of these receptors
on the tongue that are also
expressed on the gonads
is yet another example of
what at least in this case
seems to be an appetitive thing,
a desire to move toward certain foods
and maybe even the experiences
that are associated with those foods.
I want to talk about a particular aspect
of food and a chemical reaction in cooking
called the Maillard reaction.
Some of you have probably
heard of the Maillard reaction,
it's spelled M-A-I-L-L-A-R-D.
The D is silent, so don't
call it the Maillard reaction,
and it's not the Maillard reaction,
it is the Maillard reaction.
And the Maillard reaction is a reaction
that for the aficionados is
a non-enzymatic browning.
The other form of non-enzymatic
browning is caramelization,
although when you hear caramel, carmel,
I think it's caramel.
You think sweet, and indeed
caramelization is a sugar-sugar
chemical interaction that leads
to a kind of nicely toasted
not burnt, but nicely toasted sweet taste.
Whereas the Maillard reaction
is that really savory reaction
that occurs when you have a
sugar amino acid reaction.
Remember, we have neurons in our gut,
but also neurons in our tongue
and neurons deep in the brain
that are comparing the amount
of sugar to savory.
Okay, and the Maillard
reaction is very interesting
for you chemists out there,
this is going to be way too elementary.
And for you non-chemists
it's probably going to be
a little bit of a reach,
but just bear with me, all
these chemicals that we sense
have a different structure,
it's like hydrogens, and oxygens,
and aldehyde groups, and all these things.
And basically the Maillard reaction
involves what's called a free aldehyde.
If you didn't like chemistry,
don't worry about it,
it's basically got a group
there that kind of sits open
that allows it to interact
with other things and actually
through the use of heat
and the process that we call brazing,
which I'll talk about in a moment
you create a what's called a ketone group.
Now, most people now have heard of ketones
'cause they think about
the ketogenic diet,
but a ketone group is
actually a chemical compound
that can be used for energy,
and that's why people say you
can use ketones for energy,
but if you've ever actually
encountered ketones,
if you for instance, get liquid ketones,
a ketone ester, and you smell it,
what does it smell like?
It smells a little bit like an alcohol,
but it has a kind of savory taste,
even when you smell it.
Okay, there are other smells
that have these tastes too,
but for the Maillard reaction
which could be created for instance
like if you took a piece of meat,
or if you're not a meat eater
if you took tomatoes and
you cook them in a pan
and you cooked it nice and
slow till it's simmered
and almost started to brown
and burn a little bit.
Usually if I do it burns,
I'm not a good cook
as Costello points out a lot,
but it gets that like almost
tangy, very umami-like flavor.
And sometimes it will
even stick to the pan,
if you scrape it off
and actually you can
taste it in your mouth
as you're cooking it.
That's the Maillard reaction,
that's that free aldehyde group,
and that's the production
of a ketone group.
When you smell ketones, it
smells very much like that.
Okay, some people talk about the ketones
will produce like fruity breath.
And that's true if people
are really far into ketosis,
their breath has a kind of fruity odor,
that's a little bit of a different thing.
So, the relationship
between smell and taste
is a very, very close one.
And this is why when people drink wine
they often will inhale and then sip,
some of that is just kind of like pomp
and circumstance frankly,
they make a big deal of it,
but they can sense
things with their mouth.
The combination of odor receptors
being activated in a particular way,
and taste receptors in
the mouth being activated
in a particular way,
triggers the activation
of multiple brain areas that
are associated with taste,
and circuitry within the body
that's associated with the behaviors
that relate to that taste
like leaning toward it,
or leaning away from it
depending on whether or not
it's appetitive or aversive.
So the Maillard reaction is
a very interesting reaction
involving this sugar amino acid thing,
but really it's what it's
doing is heating up food
such that the amino
acids are more available
literally in their chemical form
for detection by the neurons.
This is a phenomenon that occurs
in other domains of the taste system.
For instance, a lot of what's happened
with highly processed foods
is that manufacturers have figured out
how to trigger more dopamine response
by ingestion of these sugary
foods and created textures,
and created essentially design
of foods for two purposes.
I'm not out to completely
demonize processed food,
I did that in a previous episode,
but processed foods are
really designed to take foods
that ordinarily would spoil,
that would have a shelf life
and extend their shelf life
to turn foods which are not
a commodity into a commodity.
Something could be stored and
used essentially as a tradable
purchasable, sellable resource.
In doing that they change,
they've also decided to change the texture
so that you want to chew more of them.
Like I have this thing
I don't know what it is for
those Triscuit crackers.
I don't know why are those things so good?
It's probably the
texture, got those layers,
they're just kind of perfectly salty.
I haven't had one in a long time,
so I bet if I had one now
it wouldn't taste as good
as I'm imagining it.
But those combinations of
texture, smell, and taste
are what combine to activate
these different brain areas
that make you really
want to desire something.
And the people who make foods,
processed foods in particular,
are phenomenally good at figuring out
what drives the dopamine
system and makes you want more
of these things either
because of the way they taste
and/or because of the
way they trigger neurons
in your gut that have
nothing to do with taste
that simply make you
desire more of the food.
In other words, many of the
foods that are processed foods
make you desire more of them,
it's impossible to eat
one chip kind of thing.
Not because they taste good,
but because in your gut
they're activating the neurons
that activate dopamine
which make you seek more of those foods
independent of blood
sugar or anything else.
So, you may actually be
eating more particular foods
not because they taste good,
but because they feel good
on your tongue and mouth,
and because the neurons in your gut
which are totally independent
of conscious taste
are triggering the release of dopamine
which is a molecule that
makes you seek more of,
and do more of anything
that led to the ingestion of that food.
There's a fun experiment that you can do,
which is to completely invert
your sense of sweet and sour,
there's actually a way to do this readily.
When I was a post-doc,
I used to have a journal club at my house,
people would come over in
the evening once a month,
and we would read a paper,
typically the weirdest paper we could find
and we would eat food and hang out,
that's what nerds did and do for fun,
so that's what we did.
And one time someone brought
what's called miracle berry.
Okay, so this isn't some
psychedelic plant medicine thing,
miracle berry, you can purchase online,
it's relatively inexpensive.
It actually causes a change
in the configuration of taste receptors
such that when you eat
something sour, it tastes sweet.
And so what's really wild
is you ingest miracle berry,
and then you bite into a lemon,
maybe even the lemon and peel
and it tastes as sweet as a peach.
And this effect lasts several hours.
Definitely, you know, check any warnings,
I don't know what sort of warnings these,
a miracle berry carries,
but I'm sure there's always
something, you can imagine.
There are a number of
papers on miracle berry
or miracle fruit it's called,
but it changes your perception of sour
at a perceptual level,
but it does that by changing the activity
of the receptors in the mouth and tongue.
Now, this is important as a
principle and it's underscored
by experiments that have
been done by for instance
Charles Zuker's lab at
Columbia University,
where they've essentially
genetically engineered animals
such that the bitter receptor is swapped
with the sweet receptor,
or the sweet receptor is swapped
with the bitter receptor.
And what they show is
that the actual food,
the experience on the tongue
drives different pathways in the brain.
Here's what they did,
they essentially took mice
and swapped out the sweet receptor
and put in a bitter receptor.
And then what they found is that
whereas normally mice
would actively seek out
and even work for sugar water, sucrose,
they really like that.
If they replace the sweet
receptor with the bitter receptor,
the mice would avoid sugar water.
And the reverse was also true,
that mice would drink a
bitter solution avidly,
they liked a bitter solution
if they swapped out the bitter
receptor for sweet receptor.
What this means is that
our entire experience
of what we taste is dependent
on how we experience that
taste the level of the tongue.
And so, you're hopefully not
going to do genetic engineering
of your taste receptors,
but if you'd like to do
this sort of experiment
you actually can do it very
easily using miracle fruit,
the instructions of how
much to ingest, et cetera,
any safety concerns are
usually on the package
and should be easy to find.
And there's a lot of science
to support how this works,
it's kind of a fun
experiment that anyone can do
and will completely change your perception
of any food that you're
accustomed to eating.
In fact, you can figure out how much sweet
or the sense of sweetness
is contributing to your
experience of a food,
even if you don't think
of it as a sweet food
through this miracle fruit experiment.
You could take miracle fruit,
you could eat a slice of
pepperoni pizza or cheese pizza,
which perhaps normally to you
would taste just like pizza,
and you'll notice it
tastes very different.
What you are detecting is
how much the sense of sweet
was contributing to
that particular flavor.
Now, I'd like to return to pheromones.
As I mentioned earlier,
true pheromonal effects are
well-established in animals.
And one of the most
remarkable pheromone effects
that's ever been described
is one that actually I've
mentioned before on this podcast,
but I'll mention again just briefly,
which is the Coolidge effect.
The Coolidge effect is the effect
of a male of a given species,
in most cases, it tended to be
a rodent or a rooster mating.
And at some point reaching exhaustion
or the inability to mate again
because they just simply
couldn't for whatever reason.
The Coolidge effect establishes
that if you swap out the hen
with a new hen, or the female
rat or mouse with a new one
then the rat or the rooster
spontaneously regains
their ability to mate,
somehow their vigor is returned,
the refractory period after
mating that normally occurs
is abolished and they can mate again.
It turns out that the Coolidge effect
runs in the opposite direction too.
I did not know this, but I
recently learned of a study,
it was actually done in
hamsters, not in in mice,
but it turns out that females also will,
female rodents will mate to exhaustion.
And at some port...
At some point, excuse me,
they will refuse to mate any longer
unless you swap in a new male.
And then because mating in rodents
involves the female being receptive,
there are certain number of behaviors
that mean that tell you that she's willing
and wanting to mate,
so-called lordosis reflex.
Then if there's a new male,
she will spontaneously
regain the lordosis reflex
and the desire to mate.
And how do you know this?
How do we know it's a pheromonal effect?
Well, this recovery of the
desire and ability to mate
both in males and in females
can be evoked completely by the odor
of a new male or female,
it doesn't even have
to be the presentation
of the actual animal.
And that's how you know
that it's not some visual interaction
or some other interaction,
it's a pheromonal interaction.
Now, as I mentioned
earlier, pheromonal effects
in humans have been debated
for a long period of time.
We are thought to have a vestigial,
meaning a kind of shrunken down
miniature accessory olfactory
bulb called Jacobson's organ,
or the vomeronasal organ.
Some people don't believe
that Jacobson's organ exists,
some people do, there is
anatomical evidence for it
in some cadavers.
It sits not very high up in the brain
or where your olfactory bulb is,
but it's actually in the nasal passages,
so there's like little dents
as you go up through your nasal passages,
and there is evidence of
something that's vomeronasal-like.
Vomeronasal is the pheromonal organ,
they call it Jacobson's organ
if it's present in humans,
kind of tucked into some of the
divots in the nasal passage.
Even if that organ,
Jacobson's organ isn't there
or is not responsible
for the chemical signaling
between individuals,
there is chemical signaling
between human beings.
As I mentioned earlier,
the effect of tears
in suppressing the areas of the brain
that are involved in sexual desire
and testosterone of males,
that's a concrete result,
that's a very good result
published by an excellent group
with no pre-existing bias going in,
that's just what they found.
There is also evidence
both for and against
chemical signaling between females
in terms of synchronization
of menstrual cycles.
Now, the original paper on
this was published in the 1970s
by McClintock, and it essentially said
that when women live together
in group housing, dormitories,
and similar that their menstrual
cycles were synchronized
and that was due to what was hypothesized
to be pheromonal effects.
Over the years,
that study has been
challenged many, many times.
The more recent data point to the idea
that there is chemical-chemical
signaling between women
in ways that impact the
timing of the menstrual cycle,
but that depending on whether or not
some of the women are
in the ovulation phase,
the ovulatory phase of that cycle
or whether or not they are
in the follicular phase,
the phase when the follicle is maturing
before the egg actually obviates.
So two separate phases of
the 28 day menstrual cycle
will either lengthen or
shorten the menstrual cycle
of the person that smells those women.
Translated into English what that means
is that it is very likely it seems
that something, maybe pheromones,
but maybe some other chemical
that is independent of
pheromones is being conveyed
between women that are housed together
or spend a lot of time together
to shift their menstrual cycle,
but it doesn't necessarily
mean that they synchronize.
So for instance, if one woman
is in the follicular phase
of the menstrual cycle,
it might shorten or delay ovulation.
Excuse me, it might accelerate
ovulation in another woman,
whereas if somebody is
in the ovulatory phase
of their cycle, it might
lengthen the menstrual cycle
out so that they, the woman
who smells that person's scent
or who smells her sweat,
we still don't know the
origin of the chemical
would ovulate later.
So, all of this is to say
is that chemical-chemical
signaling is happening
from females to males
through tears, we know that.
Is that a pheromonal effect?
Well, by the strict
definition of a pheromone,
a molecule that's released
from one individual
that impacts the biology
of another individual, yes.
But in terms of identifying
what the pheromone is in tears,
that's still unknown,
it's not clear what the
chemical compound is.
So, we're reluctant as scientists
to call it a true pheromonal effect.
The menstrual cycle
and the synchronization
of the menstrual cycle
effect seems to hold up
under some conditions.
But in some cases,
there's a kind of clash of
menstrual cycles that's created
by chemicals that are emitted
from one female to another.
So, there are many
examples of this in humans,
for instance, people can recognize
the t-shirt of their mate.
If you give...
This experiment has been done many times,
I know it's been challenged
a number of times,
but the data are pretty good
by now that if you offer,
you take a collection of women
who are in stable
relationships with somebody,
you offer them the smell of
a hundred different shirts
and they can very readily pick out
their significant others scent.
Okay, that's pure olfaction,
that's not pheromonal,
but nonetheless is a remarkable
degree of discrimination,
olfactory discrimination.
You can dilute their partner's scent
down to the point where they themselves
can't consciously detect the difference
between the sweat or the t-shirt
of a hundred different t-shirts or so,
they might say, "I don't
really smell the difference,
but I think it's this one.
Yeah, this one belongs to the
person that I've been with."
And they are much greater than chance
at detecting the t-shirt
or identifying the t-shirt correctly.
So, there's no question really
that there is chemical-chemical
signaling between humans,
the question is whether or not
it's truly pheromonal in basis.
Now, you'll notice that a
lot of the examples I gave
aside from the one of tears
is women detecting the scents
of men or of other women.
And it turns out that there
are a number of papers,
the best one I think
that I could find is published
in Physiology and Behavior
in 2009, it's a review
entitled Sex Differences and
Reproductive Hormone Influences
on Human Odor Perception
by Doty, D-O-T-Y, and Cameron.
I encourage you to check out this review
it's available free as a download,
we'll provide a link to it,
you can get the full PDF if you want.
But it does seem that women
are better at detecting
odors in these odor
discrimination tasks than are men.
And yes, that it does vary
according to where they are
in their menstrual cycle.
And yes, they also looked at people
who had received gonadectomy,
they had their ovaries removed,
a number of different important controls.
None of this surprises me,
none of this should surprise you,
it's very clear that hormones
have a profound effect
on enlarge number of systems
in our biology and that smell, and taste,
and the ability to sense the
chemical states of others,
either consciously or subconsciously
have a profound influence
on whether or not we might
want to spend time with them,
whether or not this is somebody
that we're pair bonded with,
that we just met and don't
trust yet, things of this sort.
And given what's at stake in
terms of reproductive biology,
not just offspring, but
given the possibility
of transmission of diseases, et cetera,
you know, the risks of
childbirth, et cetera.
It makes so much sense
that much of our biology
is wired toward detecting
and sensing whether or not
things and people are things
that we should approach
or avoid, whether or not reproduction
with that person is the
appropriate response
or suppression of the
reproductive response
is the appropriate response, right?
As in that's the case with the tears.
So, I think these are fascinating studies,
it's an area that still
needs a lot of work,
but there are some really
wonderful papers on this.
And the one that I
mentioned a few minutes ago,
Sex Differences and
Reproductive Hormone Influences
on Human Odor Perception
is one of the better
reviews that are out there.
There are also a number of other reviews
for instance that talk
about pheromone effects
and their impact on mood,
and sexual responses,
and things of that sort,
and we will also provide
some links to those.
A lot of this is still speculative,
but I want to say I know
I said it three times,
what I really want to underscore
because it is vitally important,
and people seem to get a little triggered
by the notion of pheromones.
Just because we haven't identified
the actual chemical compound
that's acting as a pheromone
or putative pheromone
does not mean that
chemical-chemical signaling
between individuals doesn't
exist, clearly it does.
Actually, you and every other human
from the time you're born
until the time you die
are actively seeking out
and sensing and evaluating
the chemicals that come
from other individuals.
There's a really nice study that was done
by the Weizmann Institute, a group there,
I think it was also Noam Sobel's group,
but another group as well as I recall
looking at human-human interactions
when they meet for the first time.
It's a remarkable study
because what they found
was people would reach
out and shake hands.
It's is a typical response,
you know pre-pandemic, people would meet,
they'd reach out and
they would shake hands.
And what they observed
was almost every time
within just a few seconds
of having shaken hands
with this new individual,
people will touch their
eyes almost without fail.
Occasionally, they would
touch their eyebrow,
occasionally someone
would touch their hair.
We always associate that with
people having some sort of...
Or us having some sort of
self-conscious response
like oh, we want to make
sure shirt tucked in
and all prim and proper, whatever it is,
or looking right, is there
something you're like teeth?
This kind of thing,
but actually people are doing that
even if the person they
just met left the room.
So, someone's sitting there,
someone comes in, they shake hands,
and the person inevitably
subconsciously touches their eyes.
They are taking chemicals
from the skin contact
and they are placing it on a
mucosal membrane of some sort,
typically not up to their
nose or in their mouth,
typically on their eyes.
Now, animals do this all the time,
there's a phenomenon in
animals called bunting.
If you have a overeager dog
that when you meet them
or you see them again
after you've been away for the day
they'll rub their head against you, right?
Cats will do this too,
it's called bunting,
they're rubbing their scent glands on you,
they're marking you.
And believe it or not,
you're marking other people
when you shake their hand,
and they are then taking your mark
and rubbing it on
themselves subconsciously.
So, we all do these kinds of behaviors,
and now that you're aware of it
you can watch for it in your environment,
you can pay attention to people.
Some of this has probably changed
in light of the events of 2020, et cetera,
but nonetheless, we are evaluating
the molecules on people's breath,
we are evaluating the
molecules on people's skin
by actively rubbing it on ourselves.
And we are actively involved
in sensing not just
their facial expressions,
the size of their pupils,
and things like that,
but the chemicals that they are emitting,
their hormone status, how they smell.
We're detecting the pheromones possibly,
but certainly the odors in their breath.
You might say, "Well, I
don't actually go around
sniffing people's breath.
I don't, you know, unless if it's bad,"
in which case it's aversive,
but breath is communicating
a lot of signals.
And this handshake eye rub experiment
shows that we are actively
going through behaviors
reflexively to wipe ourselves
or smear ourselves with
other people's chemicals.
Now, that might seem odd
or even gross to you,
but I think it's beautiful,
I think that it illustrates
the extent to which we as human beings
are in some ways among the other animals
in our subconscious, sometimes conscious,
but certainly subconscious
tendency to try and evaluate
our chemical environment
through what we inhale through our nose,
what we ingest through our mouth,
and what we actively take
off other people's skin
and rub on ourselves to evaluate it
and what we should do about it,
and perhaps that person as well.
So today, we talked a
lot about olfaction taste
and chemical sensing between individuals.
I'd like to think that you now know a lot
about how your smell system works
and why inhaling is a really
good thing to do in general
for waking up your brain,
and for cognitive function,
and for enhancing your sense of smell.
We talked about how to
enhance your sense of taste,
and we talked about chemical signaling
between individuals as
a way of communicating
some important aspects about biology.
People are shaping each
other's biology all the time
by way of these chemicals
that are being traded
from one body to the next
through air, and skin to
skin contact, and tears.
If you're enjoying this podcast
and you're finding the information useful
please subscribe on YouTube,
that's one of the best ways to support us.
You can also put any questions you have
and feedback in the
comment section on YouTube.
If you don't already subscribe
on Apple and Spotify,
you can support us by
subscribing on Apple and Spotify.
And on apple, you get the
opportunity to leave us a review
up to five stars,
If you think we deserve five stars
please give us a five star review.
In any case, you can
leave us comments there.
And we are also very active on Instagram,
@hubermanlab on Instagram is where I post
yes, clips from the podcast,
but also additional new
and original content,
and you have the opportunity
to put your questions
in the comment section
below those posts as well.
I do read all the comments on YouTube,
on Apple, and also on Instagram.
We have a website hubermanlab.com
where all the podcasts are housed
with links to YouTube, Apple, and Spotify
as well as downloadable links,
everything's zero cost of course.
And there, you can also find any links
to additional resources
that we might post.
As well, please check out our sponsors
that we mentioned at the
beginning of each podcast episode,
those sponsors are the way
that we are able to bring zero
cost to consumer information
about all these topics to you each week.
And we also have a Patreon,
it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman,
and there you can support us
at any level that you like.
Today, we didn't really
talk about supplements,
but previous episodes
and in future episodes
we'll talk about supplements
and things that you can take
to modify your biology and
nervous system if you like.
We've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne has the
highest levels of stringency
with respect to the amounts
of given compounds that
are in their supplements,
and the quality and
purity of those compounds.
If you go to Thorne,
thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can see all the
supplements that I take
and get 20% off any of those supplements
as well as any of the other
supplements that Thorne makes,
you just go to thorne.com/u/huberman.
And if you enter their
website through that portal
you get 20% off any of
their things at checkout.
Last but not least,
I want to thank you for
your time and attention,
and your willingness to
embrace new concepts and terms,
and to learn about science and biology,
and protocols that
hopefully can benefit you
and the people that you know,
and of course thank you for
your interest in science.
[gentle music]